# GitLab Query Language (GLQL)

## Overview

[GitLab Query Language](https://docs.gitlab.com/user/glql/) (GLQL) is a tool that allows you to interact with data
by creating queries to pull specific information, like issues (work items) or merge requests, directly from GitLab's API.
You can embed a GLQL query into text fields, such as comments, descriptions, and wikis,
and dynamically display the queried data right within those fields.

## Architecture

The logic for GLQL is located in GitLab’s main repository and it plugs into GraphQL API, connecting to either PostgreSQL or Elasticsearch, depending on what data needs to be retrieved. GLQL also uses a [Rust-based compiler](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-query-language/glql-rust) to process queries. For more information you can refer to the following [design document](https://handbook.gitlab.com/handbook/engineering/architecture/design-documents/glql).

## Monitoring/Alerting

There is an existing dashboard for monitoring and alerting API performance metrics where we additionally added [GLQL related definition](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-com/runbooks/-/blob/master/metrics-catalog/gitlab-slis/library.libsonnet).
It is available on the [API: Overview](https://dashboards.gitlab.net/d/api-main/api3a-overview?orgId=1&from=now-6h%2Fm&to=now%2Fm&timezone=utc&var-PROMETHEUS_DS=mimir-gitlab-gprd&var-environment=gprd&var-stage=main) Grafana dashboard.

Alerting has been configured through Runbooks to alert into Slack channel `#g_knowledge`.

* **Alerts**:
  * <https://alerts.gitlab.net/#/alerts?silenced=false&inhibited=false&muted=false&active=true&filter=%7Bcomponent%3D%22glql%22%2C%20type%3D%22api%22%7D>
  * <https://gitlab.com/gitlab-com/runbooks/-/blob/master/mimir-rules/gitlab-gprd/api/autogenerated-gitlab-gprd-api-service-level-alerts.yml>
* **Label**: gitlab-org/gitlab~"GLQL"

For any questions please reach out to the team in Slack via `#f_glql` or tag `@knowledge-group` or use GitLab's group handle `@gitlab-org/plan-stage/knowledge`.

## Logging

You can search for `json.controller.keyword: "Glql::BaseController"` in Kibana to find all successful [GLQL-related logs](https://log.gprd.gitlab.net/app/r/s/brsve). Additionally, you can search for `json.graphql.glql_referer`, which will provide the URL where GLQL was embedded, and `json.graphql.glql_query_sha` to filter logs for the same GLQL query used across different groups and projects.

Every GLQL request generates multiple log entries with different purposes:

* **All requests** are logged to `production_json.log`
* **GraphQL requests** get an additional log entry in `graphql_json.log`
* **Failed requests** generate a third entry in `exceptions_json.log`

This means GraphQL requests typically have 2 log entries per request, or 3 if the request fails.
These different log types can be identified by using the `json.subcomponent` field in Kibana (`production_json`, `graphql_json`, and `exceptions_json`).

For production logs, the `json.exception.class` field is not populated because errors are rescued in the [`GraphqlController`](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/-/blob/182e20cc9c07611d25af752f52b64fb1ea352ae4/app/controllers/graphql_controller.rb#L72-82). So it means you will first have to take extra steps before finding the query SHA and referer for a failed request:

* Search for failed requests using:
  * `json.operation_name: "GLQL" AND json.exception.class: *` (for any exception) or
  * `json.operation_name: "GLQL" AND json.exception.class: "ActiveRecord::QueryCanceled"` (for timeout errors specifically)
* Copy the `json.correlation_id` from the failed request
* Create a new search using this correlation ID to find all related log entries
* Look for the `production_json` (`json.subcomponent` fields) log entry with the same correlation ID to find the `json.graphql.glql_query_sha` and `json.graphql.glql_referer` values

Additionally, for GLQL requests we log the project name in the `json.meta.project` field which can be helpful when you want to enable `glql_load_on_click` feature flag on the project level.

## Database

Because GLQL queries are intended to be read-only, we wrap them in [`use_replicas_for_read_queries`](https://docs.gitlab.com/development/merge_request_concepts/performance/#use-read-replicas-when-possible) to ensure all reads hit Postgres replicas. This change improves resilience against long-running queries and avoids unnecessary load on the primary (for example, when a user’s recent write hasn’t yet been propagated to the replicas).

## Rate Limiting

We [rate limit](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/-/merge_requests/182141) all GLQL queries to ensure that if two requests for the same query fail within a 15-minute window with an `ActiveRecord::QueryAborted` error, that query (identified by its unique SHA) is blocked across all pages during that period. A dashboard for this specific [rate limiting cluster](https://dashboards.gitlab.net/goto/C3IlVGtHR?orgId=1) is available for more details if needed.

Additionally, since GLQL is served under `/api`, it also inherits the standard GraphQL throttling settings:

* [`throttle_unauthenticated_api`](https://docs.gitlab.com/administration/settings/user_and_ip_rate_limits/#enable-unauthenticated-api-request-rate-limit)
* [`throttle_authenticated_api`](https://docs.gitlab.com/administration/settings/user_and_ip_rate_limits/#enable-authenticated-api-request-rate-limit)

## Debug locally

To use the feature locally, you need to have the `glql_integration` feature flag enabled. Additionally, since GLQL relies on [`crypto.subtle`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Crypto/subtle), which is unavailable in insecure contexts (except for `localhost`), it won’t work if you're using a custom URL like `http://gdk.test:3000` locally. To resolve this, you might want to enable HTTPS in GDK by following this [link](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-development-kit/-/blob/main/doc/howto/nginx.md).

### Additional feature flags

* `glql_integration` - the main feature that controls whether GLQL is enabled or disabled across the entire system.
* `glql_work_items` - connect to `WorkItems` API instead of the legacy `Issues` API.
* `glql_es_integration` - connect to Elasticsearch instead of PostgreSQL to query for data.
* `glql_load_on_click` - when a GLQL block is embedded in a text field, it loads every time you scroll to it. With this feature flag enabled, GLQL blocks load on demand, and you’ll need to click a button to load the block if there are more than 20 GLQL views per page.

## Incident Handling Steps

When an incident occurs where someone is overloading the database - either intentionally or unintentionally - by embedding multiple long-running queries in a popular issue that receives high traffic, you can follow these steps to mitigate the impact:

### Monitor the GLQL Health Dashboard

This [GLQL Health Dashboard](https://log.gprd.gitlab.net/app/r/s/wfJmT) shows GLQL query performance over the last 14 days to help find slow or broken queries.
It should help with finding issues with high GLQL traffic, seeing which queries are used most, and spotting queries that keep timing out.

### Enable the `glql_load_on_click` feature flag

When you have identified the specific issues or queries that are causing the problem, the first step is to enable the `glql_load_on_click` feature flag.

Since GLQL blocks automatically load every time a user scrolls to them, enabling `glql_load_on_click` changes GLQL blocks to load on-demand, which should help mitigate the risk.

The flag can be enabled at either the **group** or **project** level:

```plaintext
/chatops gitlab run feature set --project=gitlab-org/gitlab glql_load_on_click true
/chatops gitlab run feature set --group=gitlab-org glql_load_on_click true
```

**Important to keep in mind:**

* Enabling this flag for a **top-level group** applies it to all descendant projects and sub-groups in the hierarchy.
* Enabling this flag for a **sub-group** applies it only to that specific sub-group, not to its descendants.
* **Individual issues** cannot be blocked, but this is unnecessary since the feature flag provides protection at the group/project level.

### Manually remove the query

Additional mitigation option for a user with `maintainer` permission can be to edit the comment to remove problematic queries or delete the comment entirely as a last resort.

### Post-incident cleanup

Once the incident is resolved, remember to disable the `glql_load_on_click` feature flag to restore normal functionality.
Leaving this flag enabled will have a negative impact on user experience.
