# Generating GPG Key Pairs

In the GPG key system, you generate a key pair, Public and Private.

The private key content should be kept secret, with restricted access. The passphrase for this key should be kept separately, and maintained in a Vault with restricted access.

The following sections explain how to create and manage the keys.

## Ensuring Entropy

### Linux

To properly secure they key generation process, one should do their best to provide extensive amounts entropy on their system. We'll cover how to do so on `Linux`.

* We're **requiring** physical hardware. **Absolutely** *No virtualized instances.*
* Check for access to a hardware random number generator (`hwrng`), `ls /dev/hwrng`
  * Check loaded kernel modules for `rng` or random number generator. `lsmod | grep rng`. This should output something akin to the following:

    ```
    tpm_rng                16384  0
    rng_core               16384  2 tpm_rng
    tpm                    40960  5 tpm_tis,trusted,tpm_crb,tpm_rng,tpm_tis_core
    ```

  * What we're looking for is a hardware random source, such as the `tpm`, beyond just `rng_core`. This may be: `intel-rng`, `amd-rng`, `tpm-rng`, even `bcm2708-rng`
  * If there are no modules other than `rng_core` present, then it is likely that you do not have a hardware random generator, or it is not active.
  * Depending on compute hardware, you may have a TPM, but is not active. If the hardware has it, attempt to load the module with `sudo modprobe tpm-rng`, and check `ls /dev/tpm*` and `ls /dev/hwrng` again.
  * If you do have a `hwrng`, this will need to be activated & tied to the [CSPRNG][] thanks to `rngd` daemon. This is often provided by the `rng-tools` packages, and should be started before continuing.
* If the hardware does not have a hardware RNG, we'll want to provide extra entropy by creating a lot of extra input/output to feed the [CSPRNG][] in the kernel.
  * Install and activate [`haveged`](http://www.issihosts.com/haveged/)
  * Be prepared to run a few tasks in the background (using screen, or backgrounding a call)
    * `dd if=/dev/<largedisk> of=/dev/null bs=1M` will generate extensive amounts of disk read IO, while not impacting any other subsystems.
    * `iperf` command can be used to create network load.

### OSX

On a physical OSX machine (**not a virtualized instance**) it is best
to copy a couple of random files to `/dev/random` to insure that there
is enough entropy in the system. It is best to use files that are unique
and not generally available. Two to three moderate sized files are sufficient
to increase the entropy.

## Generate the keys

To generate a key pair, a user will need [GnuPG](https://www.gnupg.org), preferably but not required to be version `2.1` or greater.

The following information will need to be provided when generating a key.

* `kind of key you want`, which will be `(1) RSA and RSA`
* `keysize`, which will be `4096`, _not the default of `2048`_
* `how long the key is valid for`, which will be `2y` for 2 years.
* `Real Name`, which will be `GitLab, Inc.`
* `Email Address`, which will be `support@gitlab.com`
* `Comment`, which will be *an empty value*, `''`

Run `gpg --full-generate-key`, and provide values as above. You will be prompted for a passphrase, which should be an alpha-numeric combination that is 20+ characters long, such as generated by `1Password`.

The result of the above, should result in a brand new key pair, visible as such

```
$ gpg -k support@gitlab.com
pub   rsa2048 2017-07-26 [SC] [expires: 2022-07-26]
      0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
uid           [ultimate] GitLab, Inc. <support@gitlab.com>
sub   rsa2048 2017-07-26 [E] [expires: 2022-07-26]
```

_Note: the key id is masked here, as `0000000000000000000000000000000000000000`_

## Export the Keys

Once the keys have been generated, you will need to create a public key for
publishing, and in GitLab's package hosting system . This is completed simply via:

`gpg --armor --export <KEYID> > package-sig.gpg`

Next, we'll to export the entire secret key:

`gpg --export-secret-key <KEYID> > packages.gitlab.gpg`

This key should be uploaded to the secure storage location.

## Extending Key Expiration

By "extending" keys, we're actually referring to extending the `expire` field into the future, thus extending the useful lifespan of the key(s). To extend the signing key pair, one needs access to the original private key and passphrase.

The steps to extend are as follows:

* Import the original private key, as this should *never* be kept on a system.

  ```sh
  gpg --allow-secret-key-import --import packages.gitlab.gpg
  ````

* Confirm the key is imported and accessible with the private key:

  ```sh
  gpg -k support@gitlab.com
  ```

* Edit the key interactively with `gpg`:

  ```sh
  gpg --edit-key <KEYID>
  ```

* Enter `expire`, follow prompts to expire by X years with `2y`
* At this stage, you will be prompted to the key's passphrase.
* Enter `key 1` to select the subkey
* Enter `expire`, follow prompts to expire by X years with `2y`
* Enter `save` to store the changes to the key and exit.
* Export the updated key(s), and upload to appropriate storage locations & systems.
* Ensure to copy the original key to a backup file in the secure storage location.

Now you can [export the keys](#export-the-keys).

Citing from [gpg-announce in 2009'Q1](http://lists.gnupg.org/pipermail/gnupg-announce/2009q1/000282.html) :

> "Anytime you have a key expiring, it is a good time to ask yourself whether
> it's time to create a new key or extend the life of the old one. Good reasons
> to create a new key include using larger key size. Good reasons to continue
> using your existing key include keeping the signatures on the key so that any
> trust you've built up by others signing your key remains."

## Purging local copies

Once one has completed any step here, and have **_safely uploaded to secure
storage_**, it is **very important** that they then **purge** the signing keys off their system.

`gpg --delete-secret-key <KEYID>`

## Reference material

* <http://irtfweb.ifa.hawaii.edu/~lockhart/gpg/>
* <http://blog.jonliv.es/blog/2011/04/26/creating-your-own-signed-apt-repository-and-debian-packages/>
* <https://www.2uo.de/myths-about-urandom/>
* <http://cromwell-intl.com/linux/dev-random.html>
* <https://www.gnupg.org/faq/gnupg-faq.html#new_key_after_generation>
* <https://www.gnupg.org/gph/en/manual/c235.html#AEN328>
* <https://riseup.net/en/security/message-security/openpgp/best-practices>

[CSPRNG]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographically_secure_pseudorandom_number_generator
