# Managing Chef User Accounts

This document covers Chef (or Cinc) server user accounts.
These accounts are used to manage Chef server resources such as cookbooks, roles, environments, data bags, and nodes.
These users do not refer to local system accounts.

## Add a user to the Chef server

To add a user you will need SSH and root access to the Chef server.

The steps to create a new Chef user are:

1. SSH into the Chef server

   ```shell
   ssh cinc-01-inf-ops.c.gitlab-ops.internal
   ```

1. Create the user:

   ```shell
   sudo -i chef-server-ctl user-create USERNAME FIRSTNAME SURNAME GITLAB_EMAIL $(openssl rand -hex 20)
   ```

   * where all-caps words should be replace with the real user information
   * see **NOTE** below if surname contains white-spaces
1. copy the private key generated by Chef for this user, which needs to be shared with the user
1. add the user to gitlab organization

   ```shell
   sudo -i chef-server-ctl org-user-add gitlab USERNAME
   ```

   **NOTE*** If you're adding a user with spaces in it, the `chef-server-ctl user-create`
   wrapper has a parsing bug. You can work around it like this:

   ```shell
   sudo /opt/opscode/embedded/bin/knife opc user create username\
   Firstname 'Surname With Spaces' gitlab_email $(openssl rand -hex 20)\
   -c /etc/opscode/pivotal.rb
   ```

## Set up knife.rb file

Once you have a Chef account and a valid private key, you should set up a local Chef/Cinc `config.rb` file and test the knife command.
Refer to the [Chef Repository](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-com/gl-infra/chef-repo/-/blob/master/README.md?ref_type=heads#set-up-your-own-chef-repocinc) readme for more information.

## Grant Chef admin rights to a user

For a user that was already created and added to the Chef server, another Chef admin can complete this task locally on their machine:

* Add the user to the admin group::

  ```shell
  knife group add user USERNAME admins
  ```

* Check that the user is in the admin group:

  ```shell
  knife group show admins
  ```

## Rotate Chef key

To do this it will be necessary to create a new keypair. Because of how Chef behaves the key has to be called _default_.

* SSH into the Chef server
* Remove the default key:

  ```shell
  sudo -i chef-server-ctl delete-user-key _username_ default
  ```

* Create a new default key:

  ```shell
  sudo -i chef-server-ctl add-user-key _username_ --key-name default
  ```

* copy the private key generated by Chef for this user.

If _default_ is not declared Chef will use the fingerprint of the key as a name.
This will end up breaking Chef execution as it will not be able of finding this key.
To check if the user is correctly setup after the key rotation run this command:

```shell
$ bundle exec knife user show _username_
display_name: NAME
email:        gitlab email
first_name:   _Firstname_
last_name:    _Surname_
middle_name:
public_key:   -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
XXXX
-----END PUBLIC KEY-----

username:     _username_
```

if the _public\_key_ field is missing it means that the key will not be found by Chef.

## Remove a Chef key from the server

To remove a Chef key, run:

```shell
chef-server-ctl delete-user-key USERNAME default
```
